Introduction1

The  peacebuilding  field  faces  a  multitude  of  crises  in  the  2020s.  The  pandemic,  climate  change and weaponisable technologies could be seen as the three main threats in a global  set  of  interacting  meta  calamities.  A  shifting  state  system,  a  dysfunctional  market  and  a  restless  global  society  face  rising  economic  inequality  and  mass  migration,  accelerating  polarisation and extremism, and urgent demands for decolonisation, racial justice and an  end to gender-based violence. This raises questions of whom the predominant state and  economic system serves, and how divisions in society are changing. Current economic and  political models offer little reprieve, and in some cases seem to be fuelling disorder rather  than promoting the order or stability they aim to achieve. How will the peacebuilding field  respond or transform given these challenges?

The  peacebuilding  field,  including  community-based  organisations,  international  NGOs,  governments, and international organisations, has tended to focus on reducing unnatural

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

deaths from armed conflict. ACLED reports that from 2010-2020, the average fatalities from  armed  conflict  totalled  100,000-150,000  per  year  (ACLED  2020).  The  Institute  for  Economics and Peace (IEP) offers a rosy view of peacebuilding successes; every $1 invested  in peacebuilding reduces the costs of violent conflict by $16 (Institute for Economics and  Peace 2021). Can peacebuilding processes help to address other premature deaths, such as  the estimated five million extra deaths per year from climate change (Zhao et al. 2021)?

Within each crisis, there are seeds of new ways of organising society. At a UN Conference on  Disaster Risk Reduction in 2015, then Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe described crisis  as an opportunity to “build back better”. Disasters can act as a trigger to create nations and  societies that are more resilient than before (Hallegatte et al. 2018). At the World Economic  Forum in July 2020, world leaders called for a “new social contract” and “a great reset” to  support the recovery from the pandemic and move towards a new order based on “social  justice” that honours the dignity of every human being (Schwab 2020). The peacebuilding  field needs its own great reset. The current crises offer an opportunity to build back better  by decolonising peacebuilding theory and practice.

“Decolonising  agendas”  are  emerging  all  over  the  world  and  relate  to  humanitarian  aid,  development, anthropology, sociology and many other facets of life, including peacebuilding.  Decolonialism  refers  to  the  process  of  undoing  colonial  worldviews,  institutions  and  impacts.  In  the  last  few  years,  various  authors  have  begun  laying  out  an  agenda  for  decolonising peacebuilding (Ayindo 2017; Omer 2019; Linklater 2014; Beraia et al. 2019).  The study of decoloniality, abolition and reparations is relevant to peacebuilding, both as  an  analytical  framework  that  explains  global  patterns  of  grievance  against  political,  economic  and  social  systems,  and  as  an  agenda  for  how  to  build  peace,  foster  social  transformation  and  protect  human  security.  This  Policy  Brief  explores  and  opens  up  for  discussion and dialogue how the peacebuilding field can respond to the profound sense of  chaos  and  unpredictability  in  today’s  world  by  addressing  the  colonial  distortions  of  governance, economy and society.

The Policy Brief begins by describing the evolution of the peacebuilding field in two related  categories:  one  emphasising  social  justice,  and  the  other,  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  spectrum, emphasising stability. It provides a brief overview of the relatively recent, acute  threats  posed  by  the  pandemic,  climate  change  and  weaponisable  technology.  It  then  describes how these three acute threats magnify troubling chronic threats within the state  system, the market and in society, such as political marginalisation, economic inequality,  structural injustice, polarisation and growing extremism. The final section then explores an  agenda for decolonising peacebuilding. This Policy Brief as a whole examines global trends  affecting peacebuilding and offers provocative questions for the peacebuilding field, and its  allies, to respond to: What would a “build back better” approach to peacebuilding look like,  starting from the current triad of crises, which some have claimed constitute a “new world  disorder”? Do these current crises offer any opportunities for healing and transformation?  What would a “great reset” for the peacebuilding field look like in practice?

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

Social Justice vs. Stability Peacebuilding

There is broad agreement that the term “peacebuilding” represents a multifaceted approach  to  transforming  conflict  (Berghof  Foundation  2019).  It  is  generally  agreed,  too,  that  peacebuilding  aims  to  address  both  structural  and  direct  violence,  and  to  achieve  both  negative  and  positive  peace.  Negative  peace  is  the  absence  of  war  and  direct  forms  of  violence.  Positive  peace  describes  a  broader  concept  of  political,  economic  and  social  resilience and human security that prevents the outbreak of violent conflict by addressing  structural violence. Peter Wallensteen’s idea of “quality peace” suggests that a world that is  sustainably  resilient  to  shocks  requires  social  justice  (Wallensteen  2015).  Positive  peacebuilding seeks to design systems that do more good for more people and protect the  most vulnerable.

However,  in  practice,  there  are  significant  disagreements  over  the  goals,  analytical  frameworks, funding and implementation of peacebuilding. “Peacebuilding” has become a  confusing term representing colonialism and Western military intervention to some, and  local empowerment, social justice and nonviolent protest movements to others. It could be  argued  that  the  peacebuilding  field  has  evolved  into  two  distinct  paradigms:  stability  peacebuilding  focused  primarily  on  a  Western  liberal  negative  peace,  and  social  justice  peacebuilding focused on local agency and pursuing positive peace.

Social justice peacebuilding grew out of civil society-led nonviolent social movements, such  as those in the Philippines and South Africa which brought strides in democracy, human  rights  and  social  cohesion.  From  the  1960s  through  to  the  early  1990s,  marginalised  communities expanded peacebuilding efforts that centred on intersectional social justice  ethics  and  collective  action  against  repressive  and  authoritarian  regimes.  Social  justice  peacebuilding  aims  to  shift  power  and  build  social,  economic  and  political  equity.  Peacebuilding  processes  like  dialogue,  mediation  and  restorative  justice  grew  out  of  the  forms  of  governance  that  preceded  the  state,  such  as  tribal  and  Indigenous  methods  of  conflict management  and  transformation  (Tuso  and  Flaherty  2016).  Small peacebuilding  efforts relied on minimal resources, generated locally.

This social justice peacebuilding paradigm has a long history and grew out of legacies of  resistance to colonialism. Colonial worldviews emphasise white supremacy, the belief that  people with white skin inherently hold more value and power than people with black and  brown skin. Colonial institutions work to perpetuate the economic and political dominance  of some states and corporations over others. Colonial impacts include the legacies of stolen  land, slavery, anti-Blackness, resource extraction and other harms that came about through  colonialism.

For example, Frantz Fanon’s 1961 book The Wretched of the Earth critiqued the process of  decolonialisation, observing that new African leaders reproduced colonialism and did not  decolonise the minds of the new citizens of these states (Fanon 1961). Paulo Freire’s 1970  Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed  explored  the  decolonising  process  that  began  when  people  analysed  historical  and  structural  oppression  (Freire  1970).  Ngũgĩ  wa  Thiong’o’s  1986  Decolonising the Mind described colonialism as a “cultural bomb” which removed people’s

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

beliefs, identities, capacities and histories and replaced them with Western narratives (wa  Thiong’o 1986).

Decoloniality  is  the  study  of  the  “matrix  of  power”  that  began  with  colonisation,  settler  colonialism  and  slavery,  and  their  lasting  political,  economic,  social  and  environmental  impacts (William and Mary 2021). A decolonial agenda drives social justice peacebuilding’s  analyses  of  colonial  economic exploitation,  vulture  capitalism,  the global  arms  trade  and  military industrial complex, economic justice and reparations for colonialism, slavery and  extractive trade agreements. Social justice peacebuilding critiques the economic and trade  system that left the people in resource-rich countries like Nigeria and the DRC impoverished.

In social justice peacebuilding, people who are affected by conflict and injustice design and  implement their own transformative initiatives. Some of the earliest nonviolent civil society  movements  evolved  into  local  peacebuilding  initiatives  in  the  1980s  in  the  Philippines,  South  Africa,  Kenya  and  Nicaragua.  These  local  groups  used  Indigenous  approaches  to  dialogue, peace mediation and restorative justice to build the field’s core set of skills and  processes.

While outsiders may play a role in supporting local people, in social justice peacebuilding,  outsiders are accountable to layers of insiders, particularly the most vulnerable and harmed.  In  social  justice  peacebuilding,  diverse  local community-based  groups  loosely  coordinate  with each other but are under no one form of leadership or control.    By  the  1980s,  Western  interest  in  peacebuilding  initiatives  was  increasing.  The  Hewlett  Foundation  invested  over  $160  million  in  building  conflict  resolution  programmes,  particularly at academic institutions in the 1980s and 1990s (Kovick 2005). This investment  built  wider  acceptance  of  and  legitimacy  for  the  peacebuilding  field.  As  outsiders  began  initiating  humanitarian,  development  and  peacebuilding  programmes,  awareness  slowly  grew that outsiders’ good intentions could cause unintended negative impacts. The ethics  of “do no harm”, “local ownership” and “conflict sensitivity” became an urgent issue as more  and  more  outsiders  began  intervening  with  the  goal  of  building  peace  (Anderson  1999;  Lederach and Jenner 2002).

Stability  peacebuilding  traces  its  history  to  former  UN  Secretary-General  Boutros-Ghali’s  distinction  between  peacemaking,  peacekeeping  and  peacebuilding  in  the  early  1990s  (Boutros-Ghali  1992).  Governments  and  international  institutions  did  not  invent  peacebuilding. Rather, they hired graduates from Hewlett-funded academic institutions and  peacebuilding experts who had learned their skills on the front lines of conflict in the Global  South. Official recognition of the peacebuilding field brought new funding and status. As the  field of peacebuilding grew and took on more stability goals, it became distanced from social  justice-based  people  power  movements  and  became  more  militarised,  with  stability  peacebuilding missions taking place alongside those involving security forces (Perito 2007).

Stability peacebuilding came to be known and critiqued as “Western liberal peacebuilding”.  States  took  on  military-led  peacebuilding  efforts  in  places  like  Bosnia-Herzegovina  and  “conflict-affected countries”, primarily in the Southern Hemisphere. In 2002, Roland Paris

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

international  stability-oriented  peacebuilding  missions  echoed  the  observed  that  assumptions and behaviours of the colonial era, with Western powers imposing Western- style liberal democracy and free market capitalism on civil war-torn countries with the goal  of “civilising” local populations (Paris 2002). Oliver Richmond asked the same questions in  his  2006  article  on  the  underlying  assumptions  of  the  “liberal  peace”  model.  Richmond  argues  that  this  model  inherently  justifies  Western  military  occupation  to  “correct”  the  problems in states abroad (Richmond 2006, 13), including an assumption that international  intervention should oust corrupt local governments by military force (Richmond 2010). By  the late 2010s, Séverine Autesserre’s ethnography of Western interveners’ cultural habits,  beliefs  and  behaviours  in  her  book  Peaceland  (Autesserre  2014)  offered  compelling  testimony to the colonial echo of complex modern peace operations which she called “Peace,  Inc.”.

Stability  peacebuilding  is  primarily  concerned  with  extending  state  authority  and  strengthening rule of law. It often mirrors a colonial mindset where Western states provide  “aid” to “fragile and conflict-affected countries” (FCS) instead of critiquing an economic and  trade system that has left the people in resource-rich countries like Nigeria and the DRC  impoverished.  Instead  of  analysing  power  dynamics  and  their  own  lack  of  language  and  cultural capacity, Western stability peacebuilding “experts” tend to assume a lack of local  capacity and a need for a charity model of Western aid rather than reparations or economic  justice.    Stability peacebuilding planning and strategy start with foreign and national government  meetings with minimal external or local input. Local civil society organisations are referred  to  as  “implementing  partners”,  tasked  with  delivering  on  plans  conjured  up  in  Western  capitals2. These implementing partners are the people most affected by injustice or conflict.  Yet they have little power and are accountable to foreign donors who provide oversight to  their  work.  When  foreign-designed  peacebuilding  plans  fail  or  backfire,  locals  have  few  mechanisms to hold these external actors to account. Unlike social justice peacebuilding,  stability peacebuilding tends to view people power movements as a form of “civil unrest”  and a threat to economic interests    A  growing  literature  on  the  “local  turn”  in  peacebuilding  now  argues in  support  of more  emancipatory,  social  justice-oriented  local  peacebuilding  efforts  in  contrast  to  a  more  stability-oriented, top-down, military-led approach to peacebuilding (Ojendal, Schierenbeck  and  Hughes  2017).  Atalia  Omer  defines  a  decolonising  approach  to  peacebuilding  as  requiring a critique of the complicity of actors and institutions carrying out peace work with  colonialist  commitments  to  oppressive  economic,  political,  social  and  cultural  systems.  Omer  insists  that  a  decolonising  peace  agenda  must  resist  the  practice  of  co-opting  indigenous  conflict  resolution  mechanisms  that  “alleviate  the  government  from  taking  responsibility for its roles in historical injustice”. She also insists that elicitive approaches  that “listen to” or “empower” local people are not, by definition, decolonial (Omer 2020).  Unfortunately, a false Western history of the peacebuilding field continues to spread. For

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

example, the book Rising Powers and Peacebuilding portrays the 1990s advent of Western  liberal  peacebuilding  as normative  and makes  no reference  to  the  longer history of  local  social justice peacebuilding (Call and de Coning 2017).    “Social justice peacebuilding” and “stability peacebuilding” exist today not as discrete efforts,  but as poles of a spectrum. These two approaches need not be completely contradictory.  Social justice can contribute to stability, and stability can enable social justice. The range of  activities  is  also  similar,  including  a  shared  focus  on  intergroup  dialogue,  youth  empowerment, gender sensitivity, inclusion in peace processes, participatory governance  mechanisms,  and  so  on.  For  example,  Berghof  Foundation  illustrates  a  mix  of  the  two  approaches. Many of Berghof’s publications feature civil society-led peacebuilding with an  emphasis  on  local  empowerment  and  social  justice  goals.  Berghof’s  approach  is  state- funded, but it does not directly coordinate with military forces to achieve state goals.    The  UN’s  “sustaining  peace”  concept  focuses  on  locally  owned  political  solutions  that  leverage  the  UN’s  three  pillars:  human  rights,  sustainable  development,  and  peace  and  security.  This  terminology  and  framing  also  suggest  a  fusion  of  both  social  justice  peacebuilding  and  stability  peacebuilding.  Nevertheless,  while  the  goals  and  activities  of  these two poles of peacebuilding may be complementary in some cases, the power dynamics  are sometimes incompatible. As illustrated in Table 1, social justice peacebuilding centres  on local analysis and action. Stability peacebuilding centres around state interests.    Table 1: Peacebuilding Paradigm Spectrum

Civil Society-led

“Social Justice”  Peacebuilding

Government-led

“Stability” Peace-

building

  A positive, just peace that

  A negative peace ending

addresses structural injustice

  Builds social, economic and

political equity and  participatory governance

  Challenges the status quo and

rule of law where they  reinforce discrimination

  Achieves human security as

defined by communities  Intersectional and  anticolonial analysis of  human rights, power and  oppression

large-scale public violence    Extends state authority for

top-down governance  (Re)establishes the rule of  law

  Achieves national interests

as defined by the state

Analysis

  Analysis of drivers of

violent conflict that tends  to ignore colonialism and  historical power dynamics

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

  Analyses structural and direct  violence, as well as individual  unconscious bias

  Local or sometimes  government funding

  A focus on wider economic

justice and reparations

Funding

  Primarily government-

funded foreign “aid”

  Begins with local community

Planning and

  Begins with foreign and

leaders, traditional and  modern civil society groups,  with some international NGO  and government input from  abroad

Strategy Process

national government  meetings with minimal  input from local  “implementing partners”

  Local peacebuilding efforts

Coordination

  Operates alongside state

operate independently,  although sometimes with  loose local coordination

security forces, and under  state-led command

All forms of peacebuilding along the spectrum laid out in this section face  major shifts to  their environment and must find their bearings among both acute (section 3) and chronic  (section 4) crises.

The Meta Crises: Pandemic, Climate Change and Weaponisable Technologies

At  least  three  acute  global  threats—the  pandemic,  climate  crisis  and  new  weaponisable  technologies—affect the peacebuilding field. All three are increasingly disrupting the state  system, the market and society at a global scale (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Acute Global Crises

Pandemic

Climate Change

Weaponisable Technology

In a globalised world, pathogens like SARS-CoV-2 spread rapidly via international travel. The  ongoing  pandemic,  which  started  in  2020,  exacerbates  existing  political,  economic  and  social inequalities and adds to the crisis of government legitimacy. Covid-19 lockdowns and  isolation worsen mental health, gender-based violence, and fuel the spread of conspiracy

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

theories and violent extremist ideologies. Governments around the world are struggling to  slow  the  spread  of  the  virus  and  to  meet  public  health  needs.  Some  governments  are  exploiting the pandemic to increase their control over public information, using repression  against dissidents and nonviolent protesters. At the same time, disinformation about the  origins of and treatments for Covid-19 is spreading rapidly on social media. The pandemic  is also impacting the humanitarian system, already stressed from wars and chronic refugee  crises in multiple countries, stretching the capacities of every international organisation and  state infrastructure. A global economic crisis, a food security crisis and a long-term health  crisis are emerging. The Gates Foundation describes the pandemic’s impact on global health  and vaccinations as setting the world back “about 25 years in about 25 weeks” (Gates and  Gates  2020).  The  pandemic  also  affects  funding  for  both  stability  and  social  justice  peacebuilding, as states and foundations devote more resources to healthcare. It heightens  the urgent need for locally led initiatives with sustainable sources of funding.

Along with the pandemic, the climate crisis is an unfolding global emergency causing deadly  droughts,  wildfires, storms,  flooding, heatwaves, polar  vortexes and  billions  of dollars in  damage.  The  dependence  on  fossil  fuels  since  the  Industrial  Revolution,  along  with  the  current model of endless economic growth, has warmed the planet by 1.1 degrees Celsius.  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), deaths and harms due  to the climate crisis will increase exponentially in the future if nothing is done to reduce  anthropogenic  emissions.  Gloomy  predictions  of  the  future  mean  that  urgent  action  is  required in disaster preparedness and crisis planning. If global temperatures increase by a  further 0.4 degrees to 1.5 degrees Celsius, there will be massive environmental impacts. An  increase of 2 degrees Celsius nearly doubles the harm. For example, at a 1.5-degree increase,  six million people will lose their homes to rising sea levels. At a 2-degree Celsius increase,  10 million will be forced to migrate. By 2030, global emissions must be reduced by 7.6% a  year  in  order  to  prevent  even  more  catastrophic  events.  The  expense  and  difficulty  of  addressing the climate crisis increase with each year of delayed action (Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change 2020). The climate crisis requires local-level peace processes to  negotiate local climate-related prevention and mitigation strategies necessary for stability,  as  well  as  social  cohesion  and  social  justice  efforts  in  response  to  climate-fuelled  mass  migration.

Weaponisable technology, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies,  is unleashing a third global disaster. These technologies have ushered in a “post-truth era”  where false and inflammatory posts on social media travel faster and further than truth or  debate,  distorting  political  processes  and  polarising  already  divided  societies.  Weaponisable technologies are amplifying polarising narratives on social media platforms  such as Facebook, TikTok, Weibo and Twitter. Social media platforms profit from surveilling  every individual user and creating databanks of psychometric data useful for commercial  and political advertisers wanting to target specific audiences to sell their ideas or products  (Bashyakarla 2018). In this extractive “attention economy”, platforms maximise the use of  neuroscience and behavioural design to keep users on their platforms as long as possible.  Social  media  algorithms  amplify  highly  emotive  material  such  as  hate  speech,  disinformation  and  conspiracy  theories  as  this  material  seems  to  keep  users  on  these  platforms  longer  (Schirch  2021b).  Artificial  intelligence  has  already  exacerbated

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

surveillance and systemic racism and discrimination against Black, Indigenous and People  of Colour (BIPOC), posing a “super threat” against marginalised groups (Benjamin 2019)3.  Russia, China, Iran and other states are using social media to surveil and repress democracy  activists  in  their  own  countries  with  troll  armies  and  cyber  brigades.  Digital  authoritarianism is increasing, and Covid-19 is accelerating the pace of government-backed  mass surveillance and repression, including in democratic countries (Yayboke and Brannen  2020).

Other new technologies enable remote killing by lethal autonomous weapons systems and  cyber warfare, which can be used to kill, harm or cause mass chaos. New technologies are  low-cost and widely available, ‘democratising’ access to these weapons of mass destruction.  They  pose  worrying  new  threats  to  arms  control  since  they  increasingly  remove  human  decision-makers  from  the  immediacy  of  death  and  destruction  and  deprive  them  of  the  agency to prevent violence (Altmann 2020). New technologies increase the threat of “war  by mistake”, as machines can make decisions more quickly than humans, creating a dynamic  where even a conventional conflict can quickly spiral out of hand, without humans being  able to interrupt the rapid cycle of violence. Unlike traditional weapons launched by air and  sea, cyber warfare enables attacks with little to no warning that can destroy national health,  energy  or  transportation  infrastructure.  Compared  with  the  methods  of  calculating  a  balance of power or a build-up of weapons that enable early warning in traditional warfare,  capacities  for  cyber  warfare  are  more  difficult  to  predict  or  calculate.  Technological  vulnerabilities are difficult to anticipate, making it harder to calculate safety and stability,  and making it more tempting to be overconfident. “Hybrid” warfare makes it easier for those  using it to hide their identity, and to use proxies to create ambiguity and confusion around  the  origin  of  attacks.  Arms  control  agreements  are  far  more  challenging  in  this  context  (Kaspersen, Eide and ShetlerJones 2016). Like the pandemic and climate crisis, the acute  threats  to  both  stability  and  social  justice  from  weaponisable  technology  raise  urgent  questions for the peacebuilding field.

The Chronic Crises

The State System

Amidst and partially independent of these acute crises, the state system is changing. Global  power dynamics are shifting, public expectations of the state are increasing, and competing  forms  of  governance  are  supplementing  or  challenging  the  state.  Changes  in  the  state  system are affecting peacebuilding in a variety of ways.

Lingering Colonialism and Changing Expectations of the State and Governance

European colonial powers governed over vast areas of the world, extracting local resources  to enrich themselves and drawing boundaries between states that sometimes deliberately  ignored the traditional territories of local ethnic groups. Colonisers imposed their religion,

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

language,  economics,  and  political  and  cultural  practices  on  indigenous  peoples.  African  scholars such as Mahmood Mamdani have long argued that the state system created havoc  in  governance  across  the  continent,  fomenting  interethnic  tensions  (Mamdani  2018).  Recent  Western  military  engagement  on  former  colonial  territory,  such  as  the  French  involvement  in  Mali,  and  US-led  nation-building  exercises  in  Iraq  and  Afghanistan  raise  questions about whether colonial governance has continued.

Public frustration and a declining trust in state institutions are translating into support for  anti-establishment authoritarian leaders in some areas. Freedom House’s yearly reports4  document how democratically elected authoritarian leaders manipulate public opinion to  appear as if they are providing public goods and arrange for theatrical displays of pretend  democracy to give the illusion of public support (Freedom House 2022). In the last decade,  the number of countries with democratic systems has been declining. Authoritarian leaders  and their followers use social media to spread false information about multiculturalism and  pluralism, and fuel public sentiments that minority groups and immigrants threaten society.  In a growing number of countries in all regions of the world, democracy has become a façade;  in  these  countries,  governments  go  through  the  motions  of  elections  or  make  public  speeches  about  human  rights  and  freedoms  while  working  to  undermine  them.  Authoritarian  leaders  are  usurping  power  through  contentious  elections.  Authoritarian  leaders  in  Russia,  China  and  Iran  are  attempting  to  amplify  this  trend,  as  they  view  democracy anywhere as a contagious threat (Csaky 2020). Non-state armed groups like the  Taliban, ISIS and Al-Shabaab compete with governments to provide public goods.

Stability  peacebuilding  emphasises  state-led  governance.  However,  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  including  some  Western  countries,  the  state  system  cannot  and  does  not  deliver  adequate governance of public goods. Expectations of the state have moved from its role in  holding  a  “monopoly  of  violence”  to  fend  off  attempts  to  overthrow  the  government,  towards a growing emphasis on the state’s ability to provide public goods, such as access to  healthcare, education, jobs, transport and housing. Expectations of the state also appear to  be  outpacing  government  performance.  Some  states  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  public  goods,  particularly  in  fragile  economies  affected  by  the  climate  crisis  and/or  the  pandemic.  Elite  corporate  interests  continue  to  hold  significant  political  power,  often  contributing to corruption. Far too often, public resources enrich elite groups at the expense  of  human  security  for  others,  and  state  security  forces  repress  civil  society  that  may  question corruption or abusive state policies. Global crises such as the pandemic and storms,  wildfires  and  other  climate  emergencies  pose  major  challenges  for  state  governance.  According to the US military’s 2014 report on National Security and the Accelerating Risk of  Climate  Change,  climate  change  weakens  political  systems,  disproportionately  affects  marginalised  communities,  and  contributes  to  social  unrest  and  terrorism.  The  report  claims that climate change acts as a “threat multiplier” for instability in some of the most  volatile regions of the world (CNA 2014).

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

Despite placing increased emphasis on the state’s role in providing public goods, stability  peacebuilding efforts seem to have made little impact on transforming structural violence  that harms politically and economically marginalised groups. For example, the Black Lives  Matter movement in the US highlights the continuing frustrations with systemic racism in  policing, housing and healthcare, as evidenced by the increased death rates among Black  and Latinx5 Americans during the pandemic. Despite a successful antiapartheid movement  and democratic elections in South Africa, structural violence continues to keep many Black  South Africans poor.

How  will  stability  peacebuilding  respond  to  these  wide-ranging  challenges  to  state  governance?  Do  social  justice  peacebuilding  efforts  have  an  agenda  for  governance  in  response to growing support for authoritarianism and increased expectations of the state?  How might the peacebuilding field decolonise its decision-making methods and the voices,  histories and interests that guide its approach?

Shifting Power Dynamics

At  the  global  level,  there  is  a  move  away  from  US  superpower  dominance  and  Europe- centred politics toward Brazil, Russia, India, China and regional powers in Asia, Africa and  Latin America. The Western analytical gaze offered Eurocentric narratives of history and  culture, both in favour of Western power, and often unintentionally reinforcing it through  critique (Sabaratnam 2013). In the new polycentric world order, there are multiple centres  of  influence  and  leadership.  In  their  book  Rising  Powers  and  Peacebuilding,  Call  and  De  Coning argue that the new world powers known as the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China  and South Africa) represent 40% of the global population, influence global decisions, and  are increasingly becoming donors and interveners (Call and De Coning 2017).

While the US has been the economic superpower for over 100 years, China’s accelerated  economic growth, increased military spending and bold geopolitical power moves across  Asia, Africa and Latin America, including its new humanitarian aid and lending during the  pandemic, are evidence of its rise to superpower status. While Russia holds less economic  status, its global ambitions are evident in its geopolitical moves in Ukraine, Syria, CAR and  other  countries.  These  ambitions  further  manifest  in  its  open  intent  to  undermine  the  European Union, and its role in seeding division and disinformation around the globe to  undermine democracy, polarise societies, and cast doubt on public institutions. While US  superpower dominance blended economic power, military power and a public commitment  to human rights and democracy, Russia and China are explicit that they reject international  human rights norms and see democracy movements at home and abroad as a threat. The  Economist describes China’s genocidal level of persecution against Muslim Uyghurs in mass  concentration camps as “a worldwide attack on human rights” (The Economist 2020).

The growth of regional and multilateral organisations offers scope for greater coordination  and joint problem-solving to address threats that cross national boundaries, such as poverty,  illiteracy and war. At the regional level, the African Union, Organization of American States,

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

European  Union,  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  and  other  organisations  have  emphasised their role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Populist  movements  have  expressed  fears  of  states  surrendering  their  sovereignty  and  handing  over  power  to  international  or  regional  organisations.  The  successful  Brexit  campaign in the UK to leave the European Union and the Trump administration’s criticism  of  NATO  are  examples  of  this  trend.  UN  Secretary-General  Antó nio  Guterres  offered  an  analysis  of  the  shifting  trends  in  the  state  system  in  2018.  “Multilateralism  is  under  fire  precisely when we need it most … Trust is at a breaking point. Trust in national institutions.  Trust among states. Trust in the rules-based global order ... We must repair broken trust.  We  must  reinvigorate  our  multilateral  project”  (Guterres  2018).  At  the  same  time,  UN  reform  efforts  continue and  resonate  with  the World  Economic  Forum’s call  for  a “great  reset” (United Nations 2021).

In the face of states’ hesitancy to embrace bold climate action via global treaties such as the  Paris  Agreement,  subnational  leadership  has  stepped  up  to  keep  the  consensus  alive.  Municipal  leadership  to  address  the  climate  crisis  is  significant  since  at  least  half  of  the  world’s population lives in cities, consuming two thirds of the world’s energy and emitting  70% of global carbon emissions (UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs 2018).6

How will the peacebuilding field continue to evolve in a polycentric world? Will cities and  multilateral organisations take up stability peacebuilding operations, or will they seek to  address  structural  injustices  driving  violence  and  offer  support  to  a  social  justice  peacebuilding agenda?

Rethinking the Future for Peace Processes and Operations

The number of non-international armed conflicts has more than doubled since 2000, with  two  thirds  of  these  conflicts  involving  more  than  two  parties  (ICRC  2018).  Yet  peace  processes  are  in  global  decline  in  both  their  relevance  and  success.  There  were  27  comprehensive peace agreements between 1990 and 1999 and 23 between 2000 and 2009,  but only 11 between 2010 and 2020 (Pospisil 2020, 4).7 In his report The Ungovernance of  Peace,  Pospisil  argues  that  the  popular  peacebuilding  narrative  of  a  sequence  beginning  with  a  successful  ceasefire,  a  political  settlement,  security  sector  reform,  disarmament,  demobilisation and reintegration of armed groups, transitional justice, and constitutional  development  leading  ultimately  to  elections  is  a  myth.  In  a  comparison  of  150  peace  processes since 1990, Pospisil found no pattern or evidence of any sort of sequential theory  of change to guide transitions. “Peace ungovernance” refers to collapsing peace agreements  and failures to achieve sustainable political solutions. In this view, there is no evidence of

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

an  effective  recipe  for  peacebuilding  transitions  as  emphasised  in  the  stability  peacebuilding paradigm (Pospisil 2020).

This  decline  in  peace  agreements  and  lack  of  linear  progress  toward  peace  agreements  suggest that peacebuilding could be viewed as an ongoing process, a constant negotiation  between  groups  who  have  different  goals,  different  theories  of  change,  and  different  expectations  of  how  to  manage  intergroup  conflict.  Will  the  decline  of  traditional  state- based peace processes open up space to imagine how the peace process methodology might  be applied to global climate negotiations, or to how local governments can integrate large  numbers of climate migrants?

Each of these trends within the state system impacts the future of both stability and social  justice  peacebuilding.  Relevant  market  trends  for  the  peacebuilding  field  pose  similar  challenges,  but  also  provide  the  context  for  the  agenda  for  decolonising  peacebuilding  described at the close of this Policy Brief.

The Marketplace

Within  the  marketplace  and  global  economy,  there  are  growing  questions  about  the  presumed contribution of capitalism to peace and democracy. Endless economic growth is  devastating a planet with finite resources. Yet capitalist tenets of a free market, free trade,  endless  growth  and  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  are  presumed  to  support  peace.  Investments in positive peace create greater market rewards, yet the  arms trade and the  military industrial complex still provide economic motivations for war. While severe forms  of  poverty  were  decreasing  before  the  pandemic,  inequality  is  growing,  and  wealth  is  becoming  more  concentrated,  a  trend  exacerbated  by  the  pandemic.  Gender-based  discrimination in the marketplace continues to negatively impact society. And finally, there  are  questions  about  sustainable  economic  models  for  both  stability  and  social  justice  peacebuilding.  When  faced  with  multiple  crises  related  to  health,  environmental,  and  violent conflict, cities and countries will have to prioritize and find sources of funding for  addressing multiple crises.

Reaching the Limits of (Endless) Economic Growth

Can a planet of finite resources facing a climate crisis continue to uphold economic growth  as  a  foundational  principle  for  the  marketplace?  Economists  at  MIT  wrote  The  Limits  of  Growth  in  the  early  1970s,  questioning  this  fundamental  assumption.  Computer  models  show  that  an  increasing population,  resource  extraction,  consumption  and pollution  will  have catastrophic impacts on humanity and the planet (Meadows et al. 1972).

Economic  growth  models  have  prioritised  carbon-based  energy  sources,  which  produce  climate  warming  greenhouse  emissions,  and  the  cultivation  of  fragile  monocrops,  more  prone to being wiped out by floods, droughts or climate change. According to the website  The World Counts, in 2020,8 there were 7.8 billion people on the planet. Between 2011 and  2015, humans cut down 20 million hectares of forest  each year. From 2016 onward, the

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

equivalent  of  a  football  field  of  forest  was  cleared  every  second,  averaging  28  million  hectares per year. At this rate, there will be no more rainforests in 79 years. One fifth of all  species  are  at  critical  risk  of  extinction.  Each  year,  over  7.5  million  people  die  from  air  pollution.  In  29  years,  humans  will  run  out  of  food  if  global  food  systems  are  not  transformed. In 19 years, humans will run out of fresh water. In 29 years, there will be more  plastic than fish in the world’s oceans. The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is more than two  million  square  kilometres  and  growing  (The World  Counts  2020).  The  economic  growth  model has put the world on a path towards environmental destruction, humanitarian crises,  and wars over basic resources like clean water and food.

Both stability and social justice peacebuilding face conflicts related to resource scarcity, and  for both ends of the spectrum, these conflicts will inevitably worsen in the decades ahead.  What  does  the  peacebuilding  field  have  to  say  about  economic  models  that  seem  to  exacerbate resource-based conflicts and the climate crisis?

Rethinking the Link between a Free Market and Peace

Stability  peacebuilding  embraces  the  assumed  relationship  between  a  free  market,  free  trade, democracy and peace. The Institute for Economics and Peace asserts that economic  performance and peace are often a mutually reinforcing “virtuous cycle”. Highly peaceful  countries  have  a  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  three  times  higher  than  those  with  low  levels of peace. The converse is also true. In 2017, the Institute for Economics and Peace  (IEP)  estimated  that  the  economic  impact  of  violence  to  the global  economy  was  $14.76  trillion (Institute for Economics and Peace 2018a). But IEP also asserts that poor, conflict- affected countries that invest in Positive Peace, which relates to social justice, exhibit the  strongest economic returns (Institute for Economics and Peace 2020b).

Other  authors  question  these  basic  assumptions  about  the  link  between  free  market  capitalism, democracy and peace. Amy Chua argues that free market capitalism paired with  democracy  has  increased  conflict  between  identity  groups.  She  claims  that  the  West’s  evangelism  in  twinning  a  free  market  with  democracy  has  ended  up  pitting  an  “economically  powerful  ethnic  minority”  against  “a  numerically  powerful  impoverished  majority”,  ultimately  undermining  democracy  and  fomenting  interethnic  violence  (Chua  2004).

Within  the  free  market,  the  military  industrial  complex  continues  to  drive  the  economic  motivations for building weapons. The war on terror has generated billions of dollars in  profit  for  arms  and  defence  corporations  (Zacks  Equity  Research  2016).  While  global  military  expenditure  increased  between  2000  and  2009,  it  plateaued  between  2010  and  2018, and then dramatically increased in 2019. In 2019, military spending in the US and  China increased by 5% and in India by nearly 7% (SIPRI 2020).

Unlike stability peacebuilding, social justice-minded peacebuilders articulate the negative  impacts  of  neoliberalism’s  emphasis  on  the  individual  as  consumer  and  the  Earth  as  a  possession to be exploited (Sumulong 2020). While stability peacebuilding can argue that  the free market contributes to peace, social justice peacebuilding can make the case that

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

structural justice benefits the market. What can both forms of peacebuilding do to address  better the economic drivers of violent conflict and structural injustice?

Increasing Inequality and Discrimination

Experts  at  Davos  and  the  World  Bank  have  been  excited  to  share  declines  in  extreme  poverty for those living below $1.90 a day. There are also declines in numbers in the next  three lowest income categories. The percentage of the global population living on more than  $10 a day is higher than it was in 1980. However, two thirds of the world’s people still live  on less than $10 a day. If wealth is trickling down to the poorest of the poor, the trickle is  slow  –  extremely  slow  (Beltekian  and  Ortiz-Ospina  2018).  The  UN’s  World  Social  Report  2020  found  that  inequality  is  growing  for  over  70%  of  the  world.  The  wealthiest  1%  increased their share of income between 1990 and 2015, whereas the income share of the  least  wealthy  40%  of  the  global  population  has  decreased.  The  UN  report  argues  that  inequality is driving global protest movements, worsening social divisions, and creating a  “vicious  cycle”  of  poverty  and  discontent  driven  by  technological  change,  migration,  urbanisation and the climate crisis (Department of Economic and Social Affairs 2020).

According to the US bank Citigroup, systemic racism has cost the US economy $16 trillion in  the last 20 years, and if the US were to address systemic racism, the US economy would see  a  $5  trillion  boost  over  the  next  five  years  (Peterson  and  Mann  2020).  According  to  the  Global Gender Gap Report 2020, women around the world still do at least twice the amount  of unpaid work as men. While 78% of working age men are employed, only 55% of working  age women earn an income. Women earn less than men for the same paid work in nearly  every country. At the current rate of women’s empowerment, the gender gap in economic  participation  will  take  257  years  to  disappear.  In  72  countries,  it  is  against  the  law  for  women  to  open  a  bank  account  or  obtain  loans  (World  Economic  Forum 2019).  The  UN  warns  that  the  pandemic  is  disproportionately  affecting  women,  possibly  setting  back  women’s  empowerment  by  decades  (Lederer  2020).  In  a  globalised  market,  large  corporations  are  increasing  their  size,  while  small  businesses  close.  The  pandemic  has  exacerbated this trend, with large corporations like Amazon achieving their highest profit  margins in the pandemic-affected economy in 2020.

Over the last one hundred years, official colonialism has ended, but many argue that it has  morphed into political and economic systems that continue to exploit cheap labour and loot  local resources in the Southern Hemisphere through a trade system that benefits wealthy  countries  (Burgis  2015).  Beginning  in  the  1970s,  countries  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere  proposed a New International Economic Order (NIEO) with more favourable trade terms  for  the  Global  South.  Free  trade  has  tended  to  favour  Western  countries  and  large  corporations rather than countries in the Southern Hemisphere and small businesses. Free  trade  can  undermine  local  agricultural  and  industrial  production  by  opening  borders  to  imports of cheap food and goods from other countries. Food aid is also designed in many  cases to help farmers in developed countries offload their surplus crops. The 2019 trade  war between the US and China affected economic activity around the world.

The marketplace, including aid and trade models, creates winners and losers in the global  economy. The rules favour the wealthy and punish the poor and marginalised. The market

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

affects  both  stability  and  social  justice  peacebuilding  efforts.  Can  the  peacebuilding  field  question the assumption that the current system is the best economic option and become  more active in voicing and acting on its concerns? What type of inclusive, multi-stakeholder  peace  processes  can  ensure  that  the  losers  of  the  world  economy  are  at  the  table  when  economic negotiations are underway?

Society

Over  the  last  hundred  years,  civil  society  has  reorganised  itself.  There  is  increasing  polarisation  and  a  mainstreaming  of  extremism  in  societies  around  the  world.  Gender- based  violence  in  the  home  and  community  continues  as  the  most  prevalent  form  of  violence  worldwide.  More  people  are  forced  to  migrate  from  rural  to  urban  areas  and  between  countries  to  escape  climate-induced  disasters,  poverty  and  violence.  New  technologies  have  brought  new  social  challenges,  such  as  social  media  addiction  and  surveillance by government and corporations. Increasing frustration with a status quo that  perpetuates  systems  of  inequality  and  discrimination  has  sparked  protest  movements  across the world.

Increasing Migration

According to the UN Refugee Agency, by November 2020, nearly 80 million people were  forcibly  displaced  by  persecution,  conflict,  violence,  human  rights  violations  or  events  seriously disturbing public order. Nearly half were children under the age of 18 (UN High  Commission on Refugees 2020). Even before the war broke out in Syria, rural farmers had  begun migrating to the cities when their crops failed due to climate change-induced lack of  rainfall. Syrian refugees from the civil war escaped violence to Turkey, Lebanon, Greece and  other European countries, only to face angry local populations in the host countries (Selby  et al. 2017). Poverty and lack of viable livelihoods motivate others to migrate, often first to  urban  areas  and  then  to  other  countries.  Climate  change  is  already  driving  millions  to  migrate  each  year.  But  the  potential  impacts  of  rising  sea  levels,  droughts,  wildfires  and  severe storms will fuel mass migration. Some scientists estimate that for every temperature  increase  of  one  degree,  approximately  one  billion  people  will  be  forced  to  migrate  (Lustgarten and Kohut 2020). Migrants fleeing violence, poverty and climate  disasters in  Northern  Africa  and  Central  and  South  America  face  increasingly  tight  restrictions  and  hostile host populations in Asia, Europe and North America.

Mass  migration  is  already  a  major  driver  of  conflict  and  violent  extremism.  Stability  peacebuilding  may  help  to  set  up  refugee  and  IDP  camps.  However,  social  justice  peacebuilding is necessary to address the root causes of climate shocks, conflict and poverty.  How  can  social  justice  peacebuilding  support  constructive,  non-violent  mobilisation  for  change?  What  can  peacebuilding  organisations  do  to  help  address  and  prepare  for  mass  migration? How can peace processes work at the local level to alleviate tensions and fears?

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

Increasing Trauma, Polarisation and Extremism

In their book Democracies Divided: The Global Challenge of Political Polarization, Carothers  and O’Donohue point to a global trend towards demonisation of opponents, a shift toward  extremism or pushes for radical change, and an accompanying curtailment of democratic  processes  (Carothers  and  O’Donohue  2019).  Populist  and  authoritarian  leaders  fan  the  flames  of  identity-based  conflicts,  fuelling  overt  racism,  Islamophobia,  antisemitism  and  other  expressions  of  hate  toward  minority  groups,  particularly  immigrants  and  those  perceived as “foreigners” (Clements 2019).

Widespread social and political polarisation may be contributing to the growth of violent  extremism.  Polarisation  is  leading  to  the  mainstreaming  of  violent  extremism  where  political opponents view violence against civilians as necessary (Alam 2021).

Weaponisable technology also seems to be increasing polarisation and extremism. Online  radicalisation  on  social  media  platforms  contributes  to  real-world  violence.  Violent  extremist groups use social media for recruitment, training and financing their movements,  and the pandemic has created more time for recruiters to rally support online (UN Security  Council  2020).  In  the  US,  for  example,  disinformation  about  the  US  election  and  QAnon  conspiracies shared on social media were used to mobilise participants in the siege at the  US  Capitol on  6  January  2021. The growth  of  transnational  white  supremacist  terrorism  illustrates the scale of the threat of far-right violent extremism (Schirch 2021a). Western  peacebuilding organisations must come to terms with the reality that their own societies  are  conflict-affected  and  require  robust  peacebuilding  at  home  (Parlevliet  2022  (forthcoming)).

Over the last five years, deaths caused by terrorism have decreased by nearly 60%. However,  in sub-Saharan Africa, terror attacks have increased by 67% and most terror-related deaths  still  occur  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere.  In  Europe,  North  America  and  Oceania,  far-right  terrorism has increased by a shocking 250% (Institute for Economics and Peace 2020a).  Violent extremist beliefs often include antiimmigrant narratives. Given the global increase  in climate-related migration, this could increase violent extremism.

In the short term, the lockdowns, financial disruption and media attention to the pandemic  seem to have temporarily slowed terror attacks. However, the pandemic is increasing many  of  the  drivers  of  violent  extremism,  including  government  repression,  economic  and  political marginalisation, isolation and a desire for belonging.

An  increasing  body  of  research  and  peacebuilding  initiatives  hints  at  a  link  between  the  growing crisis of meaning, anxiety, depression and behavioural health challenges and the  mainstreaming of violent extremism, authoritarianism and polarisation (Okai 2020; Bosley  2020; Steadman 2020). Both social justice and stability peacebuilding emphasise building  social  cohesion  in  divided  societies.  Behavioural  health  interventions  can  help  people  to  recognise  cognitive  fallacies  that  drive  out-group  mistrust  and  to  cultivate  healthy  behaviours and relationships that can transform the perceptions of in-group versus out- group  competition.  While  the  scale  of  polarisation  is  increasing,  peacebuilding  methods  have  not  yet  scaled up  to  meet  the  challenge.  How  can  peacebuilding  efforts  focus  more

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

attention  on  psychosocial  wellbeing  and  trauma  to  prevent  further  polarisation  and  intergroup  violence?  How  can  peacebuilding  practitioners  harness  new  communication  technologies more effectively?

Increasing Gender-based Violence

While terrorism grabs attention with public acts of violence against civilians, gender-based  violence out of sight of the public exceeds every other form of violence in terms of its scale  and  scope.  One  in  three  women  worldwide  from  all  economic  and  education  levels  will  experience either physical and/ or sexual intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual  violence in their lifetime. LGBTQ+ people experience higher levels of gender-based violence  than cisgender and heterosexual persons. While 35% of heterosexual women experience  rape, physical violence and/or stalking by an intimate partner in their lifetime, the figures  are 44% for lesbian women and 61% for bisexual women. Half of transgender people have  experienced  sexual  violence  at  some  point  in  their  lives.  Gender-based  violence  leaves  survivors with lasting trauma and disability (YWCA 2019). Female genital mutilation (FGM)  affects two hundred million women around the world and has social and economic costs  estimated to be up to 3.7% of GDP in some countries (World Bank 2019).    Environmental  degradation  and  the  climate  crisis  are  increasing  gender-based  violence  against women and girls. For example, the extractive industry in the DRC is linked to high  levels  of  rape  and  human  trafficking.  Conversely,  researchers  note  that  gender-based  violence  makes  addressing  environmental  crises  more  difficult  as  access  to  land  and  environmental resources is closely associated with gender exploitation (Castan  eda Camey  et al. 2020). The pandemic also brought sharp rises in gender-based violence in countries  around the world, due perhaps to the combination of an increase in economic stress and  lockdowns  that  prevented  people  at  risk  from  escaping  abusive  relationships  (Graham- Harrison et al. 2020).    The  peacebuilding  field  usually  focuses  on  public  violence.  Nevertheless,  strategic  approaches  to  violence  must  recognise  the  linkages  between  public  violence  and  the  gender-based  violence  that  often  happens  in  private.  How  can  the  peacebuilding  field  integrate more gender-responsive programmes to address this global surge in gender-based  violence during the pandemic? Why have efforts to prevent gender-based violence had such  little impact?

Strategies for Decolonising Peacebuilding

The triad of crises described in this Policy Brief accentuates the need for a “great reset” for  the  peacebuilding  field.  The  present  crises  are  an  opportunity  to  build  back  better  by  addressing  fundamental  weaknesses  in  current  peacebuilding  practice  and  dilemmas  heightened  by  a  bifurcated  peacebuilding  spectrum.  Decolonisation  is  at  the  heart  of  a  peacebuilding reset.

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

In  2020,  the  Black  Lives  Matter  movement  prompted  an  urgent  examination  of  broader  patterns of colonial thinking embedded in peacebuilding programmes (Garza 2020). The  Covid-19 pandemic heightened awareness of the essential role of locally owned health and  safety frameworks to address local needs. As Youssef Mahmoud notes, this may be a silver  lining of the pandemic, giving social justice-oriented peacebuilders the space to implement  their own programmes by drawing on local resources (Mahmoud 2020).

Decolonisation is not a simplistic process or empty gesture. Cultural studies scholars Aníbal  Quijano and Walter Mignolo’s 2007 definition of decoloniality critiques the hidden ways in  which the logic of colonialism manifests in the present conceptions of modernity such as  technological innovation, democratic governance and capitalist market economies (Quijano  2007; Mignolo 2007). In their influential essay Decolonization Is Not A Metaphor, Eve Tuck  and K. Wayne Yang argue that people who benefit from status quo power structures may  make superficial and symbolic “moves toward innocence” that distract attention from land  reparations  and  repatriation  (Tuck  and  Yang  2012).  These  theorists  insist  that  decolonisation moves beyond symbolic gestures. Tapji Garba and Sara-Maria Sorentino’s  response article Slavery is a Metaphor argues that a focus on land repatriation obscures the  fundamentally racist and anti-Black oppressions embedded within the harms to black and  brown  people  in  the  past  and  present  (Garba  and  Sorentino  2020).  Decolonisation  thus  requires  both  material  and  symbolic  actions  toward  freedom,  equity,  repair,  reparation,  abolition and repatriation.

Decolonialising peacebuilding creates space for people harmed by colonial worldviews and  institutions  to  name  and  be  agents  of  change  while  those  who  have  benefited  from  colonialism take active steps to acknowledge and repair the harms from colonial legacies.  The verb “decolonising” must avoid Tuck and Yang’s superficial “moves to innocence” and  instead  view  decolonisation  as  requiring  significant  cognitive  and  structural  change.  Decolonising means addressing the forces of colonial empire that echo throughout the state,  market and society in today’s world.

A  growing  literature  explores  what  decolonising  peacebuilding  might  require,  including  decolonising the design of peacebuilding, the definitions of human rights (Dilanyan, Beraia  and Yavus 2018), notions of gender (Hudson 2016) and the structure of Western aid (Paige  2020).  Decolonising  peacebuilding  requires  local  approaches  to  address  the  combined  impact of the pandemic, the climate crisis and new technologies, along with shifts to the  state system, the market and society. Below, ten core elements of an agenda for decolonising  peacebuilding  are  identified  which  highlight  the  tensions  between  social  justice  and  stability peacebuilding and illustrate what centring local analysis and action might mean.

Expand Local Ownership

What can the peacebuilding field do to heighten awareness of the strengths and practical  examples  that  put  diverse  local  civil  society  leadership  at  the  heart  of  all  aspects  of  peacebuilding?  The  concept  of  local  ownership  has  been  a  staple  of  many  international  agreements, starting with the OECD’s development cooperation model (OECD 1996). Yet in  the  last  20  years,  peacebuilding  “experts”  with  a  stabilisation  agenda  have  continued  to  displace local wisdom, capacity and social justice goals rather than work in partnership with

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

them in an anticolonial framework. Outsiders’ intentions to build peace or “stability” have  not  always  translated  into  benefits  for  local  people.  Despite  efforts  to  emphasise  local  ownership, stability peacebuilding’s hold on the field shows no signs of weakening.

Decolonising peacebuilding requires a rethinking of competing definitions of “local”. In the  race to find “local implementing partners”, too many government and international NGO  peacebuilding  programmes  choose  elite  urban  civil  society  organisations.  Yet  these  organisations  may  not  represent  the  community  in  any  real  way.  Worse,  they  may  substitute  for  actual  grassroots  organising  and  movement-building.  Diverse  community- based organisations, outside of the urban NGO sphere, must be involved in devising conflict  analysis  processes,  programme  development,  implementation,  oversight  and  evaluation  (Schirch and Mancini-Griffoli 2016). Local communities must be allowed to speak their own  languages, define the issues according to their own analysis, and carry out the strategies  that  they  think  are  culturally  relevant  and  build  on  local  capacities  and  traditions  (Errington-Barnes and Connolly 2021).

Advance Intersectional Conflict Analysis

What  can  the  peacebuilding  field  do  to  advance  intersectional  conflict  analysis?  Decolonising peacebuilding requires reflection on the power dynamics between and within  different  identity  groups.  An  intersectional  analysis  highlights  how  multiple  oppressions  intersect to form compound oppressions. Race, class, gender, religion, physical abilities and  other  individual  characteristics  intersect,  interact  and  overlap  (Crenshaw  1989).  Youth,  women, LGBTQ, Indigenous, Black and People of Colour need to be the authors of their own  peace, with outsiders playing supporting roles decided by and overseen by diverse insiders  (Schirch 2013). Paulo Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed still provides the inspiration for  how  intersectional  conflict  analysis  seeds  conflict  transformation  (Freire  1970).  Local  analysis and action to prevent and transform harm are central to a peacebuilding reset.

Facilitate Intersectional Solidarity

What can the peacebuilding field do to foster intersectional dialogue and coalition-building?  While intersectional analysis draws attention to compounded oppressions, it can also lead  to competitive victim narratives. This can pit one oppressed group against another. Colonial  powers  conducted  “research”  on  local  populations  in  order  to  understand  how  to  use  “divide and conquer” strategies to enable a small number of white colonisers to control a  large  number  of  local  Black,  Indigenous  and  People  of  Colour  (Ndlovu-Gatsheni  2017).  Intersectionality  in  practice  requires  solidarity  between  marginalised  groups.  Successful  social movements depend on coalition-building between groups (Van Dyke and McCammon  2010). In her book The Sum of Us: What Racism Costs Everyone and How We Can Prosper  Together, Heather McGhee asserts that zero-sum narratives within society bolster the forces  of systemic racism. Racial justice is about ensuring that human rights apply to everyone,  including Black, Indigenous and People of Colour (BIPOC). McGhee argues that social justice  activists  should  shift  the  focus  from  how  racism  benefits  white  people  to  emphasising,  instead,  how  racism  costs  everyone  in  society.  Racial  justice  will  create  a  “solidarity  dividend” that will enhance all people’s human rights (McGhee 2021). The skills of dialogue,

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

mediation and negotiation can be used to build strategic coalitions and a solidarity dividend  between identity groups (Bloch and Schirch 2018).

Rethink Governance and Peacebuilding

What can the peacebuilding field do to strengthen national infrastructures for peace that  are centred around diverse local peacebuilding actors? Decolonising peacebuilding requires  a  more  robust  multistakeholder  approach  to  governance  as  ongoing  negotiation;  a  permanent peace process where local voices are central, not just included on the margins  (Pospisil 2020). Diffusion of governance is necessary for robust peacebuilding and offers an  example of the best possibilities for blending social justice peacebuilding with state efforts  at  stability  peacebuilding.  Governance  is  essential  for  peace,  but  state-building  missions  rarely  prioritise  social  justice  (Cortright,  Seyle  and  Wall  2017).  The  movement  to  build  “national  infrastructures  “national  infrastructures  for  peace”  blends  national  and  local  government with civil society’s local peace and reconciliation committees and has potential  to decentralise and decolonise governance (Giessmann 2016).

Renew Attention to Economic Models and Measures

What can the peacebuilding field do to ensure that full human dignity for all is central to  economic  models?  What  can  it  do  to  promote  fair  trade  agreements  or  reparations  for  wealth extracted by colonial powers, or a combination of both fairer trade and reparations?  Decolonising peacebuilding means analysing the winners and losers in economic models  and  measures.  In  1945,  Kenneth  Boulding,  the  grandfather  of  the  field  of  peace  studies,  published The Economics of Peace. 75 years later, the peacebuilding field has little new to  say about how economic systems undermine or contribute to peace. The UN’s Sustainable  Development Goals made the link between sustainable development and sustainable peace  explicit, but did not offer a new economic model or address the exploitive, climate-warming,  consumption-based marketplace (Kharas and McArthur 2019). Most of the recent literature  on the role of the economy and peace focuses on the impact of investment or aid money in  post-war  contexts,  with  some  arguing  that  economic  aid  contributes  to  post-war  reconstruction, and others arguing that political reforms or peace agreements are far more  important than economic elements (Strachan 2012). The arguments and assumptions of the  stability peacebuilding paradigm linking a free market, democracy and peace merit closer  attention. Small declines in poverty are positive but are dwarfed by massive increases in  inequality,  which  correlates  more  closely  with  conflict.  Equality  and  particularly  gender  parity are linked to improvements in livelihoods, food security and other aspects of human  security,  as  noted  in  UN  peacebuilding  missions  (Gizelis  2009)  and  by  prominent  peacebuilding NGOs (Robinson 2016). Shifts in the market and peacebuilding field are not  keeping up with growing economic inequality, environmental destruction and the climate  crisis, all of which impact human security.

Decolonising peacebuilding also requires new funding models in which local communities  finance  efforts  to  promote  the  social  justice  they  seek.  Civil  society  reliance  on  donor  funding  leaves  local  peacebuilding  actors  vulnerable  to  international  donor  decisions  to  readjust  funding  to  new  crises,  such  as  the  pandemic,  or  external  state  interests.  It  also  reinforces  colonial  relationships.  In  Decolonizing  Wealth,  Edgar  Villanueva  analyses

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

philanthropic  power  to  move  away  from  the  colonial  paradigm  toward  one  that  understands local agency and Indigenous wisdom (Villanueva 2018). Some development  and  peacebuilding  experts  point  to  reparations  frameworks  as  necessary  to  replace  the  colonial-style  aid  industry  (Leach  2018).  Developing  local  sustainable  financing  for  peacebuilding  initiatives  is  essential  to  decolonise  peacebuilding  and  will  foster  more  resilience during crises.

Protect Social Movements and Civil Society Space

What  can  the  peacebuilding  field  do  to  foster  greater  support  for  and  synergy  with  nonviolent  social  movements?  Decolonising  peacebuilding  requires  a  critique  of  the  institutionalisation  and  professionalisation  of  the  work  of  building  peace.  Too  often,  stability peacebuilding requires formal, donor-approved institutions that may drain people  power away from social movements aimed at structural justice and human rights (Beraia,  Yavuz and Dilanyan 2019). In many countries, the civil society space is shrinking as states  use  weaponisable  technologies  to  surveil,  imprison,  kill  and  disappear  activists.  These  trends pit social justice peacebuilding against the stabilisation agenda. Recent literature has  sought to reconnect the essential role of nonviolent social movements in peacebuilding to  address the frequent absence of power analysis (Dudouet 2017; Bloch and Schirch 2018;  Stephan 2020). In light of structural violence and power imbalances, there is a need for a  shifting of power and building wider coalitions for change. Civil resistance movements seem  to be contagious, with democracy activists from Hong Kong inspiring those in Thailand and  Myanmar, Nicaragua learning from Venezuela, and millions of climate protesters interacting  and organising online. During the last decade, the frequency of public protests has increased  by  an  annual  average  of  11.5%  (Brannen,  Haig  and  Schmidt  2020).  As  civil  society  has  evolved  from  loose  protest  movements  toward  greater  capacity  and  institutionalisation,  new civil society approaches blend people power tactics with policy proposals and direct  negotiation  and  dialogue.  Decolonising  peacebuilding  requires  more  influence  for  international  civil  society  organisations,  with  civil  society  networks  and  movements  working across regions.

Address the Psychological Drivers of Polarisation and Extremism

What  can  the  peacebuilding  field  do  to  address  the  crisis  in  meaning  and  foster  greater  support  for  psychosocial  wellbeing  and  trauma  healing?  Decolonising  peacebuilding  requires  decolonising  approaches  to  psychosocial  wellbeing  and  trauma  healing  (Visser  2015).  While  Western  conceptions  of  health  tend  to  focus  on  discrete  symptoms  and  pathology, local cultural traditions include ceremonies, rituals, music, art, dancing or other  movements as positive community resources to encourage wellbeing. Local customs have  often evolved over centuries into tradition-based healing practices to address mental and  behavioural health challenges and are now backed up by evidence that they are just, if not  more,  effective  than  Western-style  interventions  (Musyimi  2018).  The  Carter  Center’s  Mental  Health  Program  in  Liberia  is  supporting  a  sustainable  mental  health  system  by  training a mental health workforce, supporting the passage of a national mental health law,  and  assisting  Liberia’s  Ministry  of  Health  in  conducting  anti-stigma  training  courses  for  pharmacists, journalists, law enforcement officers, faith and traditional leaders, and users

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis

of  mental  health  services  (Carter  Center  2021).  In  Zimbabwe,  local  psychosocial  experts  created a successful mental health programme involving community “grandmothers” who  sit on park benches located in the green spaces outside health clinics and act as friendly,  approachable lay health workers who listen to and support individuals facing anxiety, stress,  adverse trauma responses and depression – known locally as kufungisisa or “thinking too  much”.  In  2017,  more  than  30,000  people  in  Zimbabwe  received  treatment  from  a  grandmother on a Friendship Bench, with positive outcomes rivalling those of conventional  therapeutic methods (Chibanda et al. 2016).

Innovate Digital Peacebuilding

What can the peacebuilding field do to harness the power of digital technologies for social  justice and peace, and at the same time to address the multiple and polarising threats they  pose to privacy, democracy and information? Decolonising peacebuilding requires the use  of digital technologies for organising, coordinating, mobilising and amplifying local citizen  journalism on the issues that people can see and feel in their own lives. Democracy activists  are  organising  and  mobilising  mass  civic  actions  online.  While  some  peacebuilding  organisations are attempting to tap into the power of social media to amplify peacebuilding  messages  and  stories,  few  peacebuilding  organisations  are  responding  at  scale  to  the  threats  social  media  technologies  pose  to  peacebuilding  goals  (Schirch  2020).  Stability  peacebuilding  operations  will  have  a  much  more  difficult  time  working  in  complex  environments with diverse armed groups with technological killing power. New capacities  and  resources  are  necessary  to  address  digital  threats  to  civil  society  and  maximise  the  potential of digital peacebuilding.

Invest in Climate Peace Processes and Prepare for Mass Migration

What can the peacebuilding field do to prepare for the onset of climate emergencies and  mass  migration?  Decolonising  peacebuilding  requires  skills  in  designing  inclusive  peace  processes  around  climate  migration,  adaptation,  mitigation  and  prevention.  Many  peacebuilding organisations continue to focus on armed conflicts and peace processes at  the state level, giving little attention to the threats from the climate emergency. Local-level  climate peace processes should devote energy to building the public and political will for  significant shifts to the marketplace. Peacebuilding institutes have given some attention to  analysing the complex relationship between climate change and violent conflict. However,  the peacebuilding field has not addressed the scale or urgency of the climate crisis (Day and  Caus 2020). The field of environmental peacebuilding contributes innovations which assist  conflict parties to manage conflicts over environmental resources and pollution (Dresse et  al. 2018). Nevertheless, it too lacks a comprehensive view of marketplace reform to address  the  rapacious  consumption  and  growth  framework.  Given  the  importance  of  energy  transformation in addressing the climate crisis, more attention must be paid to harnessing  peacebuilding expertise to produce diplomatic agreements and policy solutions in this field.  Both social justice and stability peacebuilding will need to plan for and address the social  tensions, food shortages, disproportionate effects on marginalised communities and other  humanitarian  crises  that  will  result  from  climate-induced  mass  migration.  The  peacebuilding  field  needs  to  scale  up  local  mediation  teams  to  address  challenges  that  climate migration poses to social cohesion, and to emphasise inclusion, local capacity and

Policy Brief No. 130

Toda Peace Institute

resilience  in  local  humanitarian  leadership  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  climate  wildfires,  droughts, storms, etc.

Tackle the Elephant in the Room: The Military-Industrial Complex

What can the peacebuilding field do to address the economic drivers of arms manufacturing  and sales? Decolonising peacebuilding requires greater attention to the military industrial  complex with its profit motivation for violence. Military-based strategies for peace receive  funding despite a lack of evidence of success, sometimes even when there is evidence that  they cause more harm than good (Bacevich 2010). With the 2020 Taliban takeover of the  Afghan government, it  seems  that  20  years of  war  and  over  six  trillion  dollars  primarily  benefited US defence companies touting the neo-colonial war on terror, not local Afghans.  Yet  this  observation  was  absent  from  most  mainstream  analysis  of  the  US-led  war  on  Afghanistan and the many reflections on the 20-year anniversary of 9/11 and the legacy of  the global war on terror that followed.

Conclusion

Just  a  few  years  ago  in  2016,  the  SDGs  and  global  governance  movements  envisioned  achieving significant improvements in quality of life around the world. Today, lives are at  risk from a global pandemic, a climate crisis, entrenched structural injustices, civil wars,  terror attacks, gender-based violence and severe economic inequality. In a world of diverse  threats, rapid changes and a multitude of crises, peacebuilding leaders will need to prepare  themselves for interdisciplinary challenges. Peacebuilding will require anticolonial ethicists  as well as technocrats. Peacebuilding will need systems thinkers able to imagine and design  integrated,  anticolonial  programmes  that  address  multiple  challenges  in  a  way  which  is  sensitive  to  psychosocial  trauma,  gender,  climate,  economic  inequality,  political  polarisation, extremism and good governance. Peacebuilding engineers will need to design  every  city,  housing  community  and  computer  programme  with  peace  and  social  justice  ethics in mind.

The scale and scope of challenges facing our planet over the coming decades will require  unprecedented  innovation.  Peacebuilding  leaders  will  need  to  be  persuasive  and  charismatic communicators who are able to shine a light of hope through the fog of disorder.  Peacebuilding groups will need to partner with social movements, and think about how to  shift the field away from an international NGO model. As we move into an uncertain future  likely to bring chaos and disruption, leadership researcher Margaret Wheatley urges us to  protect  “islands  of  sanity”  in  communities  throughout  the  world,  where  local  leaders  commit to protecting values, cities innovate and develop model solutions, and people decide  to  focus on  inspiration,  best  practices  and  positive  peace  (Wheatley  2017). Decolonising  peacebuilding offers a map for moving towards a survivable future.

Lisa Schirch

Decolonising Peacebuilding: A Way Forward Out of Crisis